Why is something the way it is
==============================

.. digraph:: pvi_flowchart

    bgcolor=transparent
    rankdir=LR
    node [fontname=Arial fontsize=10 shape=box style=filled fillcolor="#8BC4E9"]
    edge [fontname=Arial fontsize=10 arrowhead=vee]

    {   rank=same;
        "pilatus.pvi.yaml"
        "pilatus.cpp"
        "pilatus.h"
    }

    PVI [shape=doublecircle]
    "pilatus.local.yaml" -> PVI
    "pilatus.pvi.yaml" -> PVI
    PVI -> "pilatus_parameters.h"
    PVI -> "pilatus_parameters.template"
    PVI -> "pilatus_parameters.opi"
    PVI -> "pilatus_parameters.adl"
    PVI -> "pilatus_parameters.edl"
    PVI -> "pilatus_parameters.csv"
    "pilatus_parameters.template" -> "pilatus.template" [label="included in"]
    "pilatus_parameters.h" -> "pilatus.h" [label="included in"]
    "pilatus.cpp" -> "libPilatus.so"
    "pilatus.h" -> "libPilatus.so"
    "pilatus_parameters.csv" -> "pilatus.rst" [label="included in"]
    "pilatus_parameters.adl" -> "pilatus.adl" [label="linked from"]
    "pilatus_parameters.edl" -> "pilatus.edl" [label="linked from"]
    "pilatus_parameters.opi" -> "pilatus.opi" [label="linked from"]

.. list-table:: Aims of PVI
    :widths: 20, 80
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Aim
      - Description
    * - Reduce boilerplate
      - At the moment you can write a simple asyn port driver in code, but
        there is a lot of boilerplate to connect it to the outside world.
        The createParam section, the database template records, and the
        lowest level screens are all quite repetitive and each layer looks
        like it could be autogenerated without much extra information
    * - Reduce copy paste errors
      - At the moment it is easy to create screens and database templates
        via copy and paste, but not changing a record name or parameter leads
        to hard to track down errors
    * - Support site specific styles for screens
      - Each site has their own style for screens, and many sites have their
        own site specific display manager. Rather than start with one display
        manager and convert, PVI takes a cut down Channel description (just a
        type, pv and widget), and lets the site specific template generate the
        screen according to local styles


How it works
------------

The YAML file contains information about each asyn parameter that will be
exposed by the driver, it's name, type, description, initial value, which record
type it uses, whether it is writeable or read only, which widget should be used,
etc. PVI reads these and passes them to Producer that creates intermediate Record,
Channel and AsynParam objects. These are passed to a site specific Formatter which
takes the tree of intermediate objects and writes a parameter CPP file, database
template, and site specific screens to disk.

YAML file
~~~~~~~~~

The YAML file is formed of a number of sections:

.. list-table::
    :widths: 20, 80
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Section
      - Description
    * - includes
      - The YAML files to use as base classes for superclasses
    * - local
      - A local override YAML file for site specific changes
    * - producer
      - Producer that knows how to create Records and Channels from the Components
    * - formatter
      - Site specific Formatter which can format the output files
    * - components
      - Tree of Components for each logical asyn parameter arranged in logical
        GUI groups

The Components are created from the YAML file with local overrides (also incorporating
the base classes for screens). These are passed to the Producer which produces
AsynParameters, Records and Channels. These are then passed to the Formatter which
outputs them to file:

.. digraph:: pvi_products

    bgcolor=transparent
    node [fontname=Arial fontsize=10 shape=box style=filled fillcolor="#8BC4E9"]
    edge [fontname=Arial fontsize=10 arrowhead=vee]

    Intermediate [label="[Record(),\n Channel(),\n AsynParameter()]"]
    Products [label="Template\nScreens\nDriver Params\nDocumentation"]

    {rank=same; Components -> Producer -> Intermediate -> Formatter -> Products}

Here's a cut down pilatus.yaml file that might describe a parameter in a
detector:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/pvi/pilatusDetector.pvi.yaml
    :language: yaml

And these settings could then be overridden in a local YAML file:

.. literalinclude:: ../../tests/pvi/pilatusDetector.local.yaml
    :language: yaml

Screen files
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The intermediate objects are a number of Channel instances. These contain basic
types (like Combo, TextInput, TextUpdate, LED, Group) and some creation hints
(like label, grouping, description, display_form), but no X, Y, Width,
Height or colour information. They may represent either a single widget or pair
of demand/readback widgets.

The site-specific Formatter consumes these Channel objects, then produces a screen
with style, sizing and layout that can be customized to the site. This means
that the default layout (big screen with lots of widgets arranged in group
boxes) could be produced for one site, then another site could make lots of
little screens with one group per screen. Styling is also covered, so the
blue/grey MEDM screens and green/grey EDM screens can be customized to fit
the site style guide.

HTML Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Parameter and record sections of the existing documentation could be
reproduced, in tabular form as a csv file that can be included in rst docs:

.. csv-table:: Pilatus Parameters
   :file: ../../tests/expected/pilatusParamSet.csv
   :widths: 15, 25, 60
   :header-rows: 1


Questions
---------

I am fairly happy with the scheme set out above, but there are a lot of
implementation questions. Here are the most pressing:

One-time generation and checked into source control or generated by Makefile?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The process would probably be:

- If pvi cli tool available, build products as part of make
- Check in products to source control
- End users will only regenerate build products if pvi tool installed

ADGenICam would be supported by building a GenICamProducer which took no
components, just a path to a GenICam XML file


Which screen tools to support?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I suggest creating adl and edl files initially, following the example of
makeAdl.py in ADGenICam, then expanding to support opi, bob and ui files
natively. This would avoid needing screen converters installed


.. _YAML:
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML


